So what's the problem?
Well, I did say most of the stuff about
graph search really doesn't matter,
undirected or directed,
it's pretty much cosmetic changes.
But the big exception is when
you're computing connectivity,
when you're computing
the pieces of the graph.
So right now, I'm only going to
talk about undirected graphs.
The directed case, we can get very
efficient algorithms for, but it's quite
a bit harder work, so that's going to be
covered in detail in a separate video.
So for now,
focus just on an undirected graph, G.
And we're certainly not going to assume
that G is connected, and the part of
the point here is to figure out whether or
not it's connected, i.e., in one piece.
So maybe the graph looks like this.
So for example maybe the graph has ten
vertices and looks like this on the right.
And intuitively, especially given that
I've drawn it in such a clean way,
it's clear that this
graph has three pieces.
And those are the things that we want
to call the connected components.
But we do want to sum up more formal
definitions, something which is actually
in math that we could say is true or
false about a given graph.
And roughly, we define the connected
components of an undirected graph
as the maximal regions that are connected.
In the sense you can get from
any vertex in the region from
any other vertex in
the region using a path.
So, maximal connected
regions in that sense.
Now the slick way to do this is
using an equivalence relation.
And I'm going to do this here in part
because it's really the right way to think
about the directed graph case, which
we'll talk about in some detail later.
So from your [INAUDIBLE] graphs,
so this isn't super important, but
let me go ahead and
state the formal definition just for
completeness about what is
a connecting component.
What do I mean by a maximal
region that's mutually connected.
So a good formal definition is as
the equivalence classes of the relation on
vertices where we define by
u being related to v if and
only if there's a path between u and
v in the graph.
So I'll leave it for you to do the simple
check that this squiggle is indeed
an equivalence relation.
I'm going to remind you what
equivalence relations are.
This is something you generally learn
in your first class on proofs or
your first class in discrete math.
So it's just something which may or
may not be true about pairs of objects.
In an equivalence relation,
you have to satisfy three properties.
So first you have to be reflexive, meaning
everything has to be related to itself,
and indeed in a graph there is a path from
any node to itself, namely the empty path.
Also a couple of these relations have
to be symmetric, meaning that if u and
v are related then v and u are related.
Because this is an undirected graph
it's clear that this is symmetric.
If there's a path from u to v in the graph
there's also a path from v to u so
no problem there.
Finally equivalence classes
have got to be transitive.
So that means if u and v are related and
so are v and w and so are u and wo.
That is if u and v have a path,
v and w have a path, then so
does u and w and you can prove transtivity
just by pasting the two paths together.
And so the upshot is,
when you want to say something like
the maximal subset of something
where everything is the same.
The right way to make that mathematical
is using equivalence relations.
So over in this blue graph we want
to say one, three, five, seven, and
nine, which are all the same in the sense
that they're mutually connected and so
that's exactly what this
relation is making precise.
All five of those nodes
are related to each other.
2 and 4 are related to each other.
6, 8, and 10,
all pairs of them are related.
So equivalence relations always
have equivalence classes,
the maximal mutual related stuff.
And in this graph context,
it's exactly these connected components,
exactly what you want.
So what I want to show you is you
can use wrapped in an outer of
the vertices to compute, to identify all
of the connected components of a graph.
In time linear in
the graph in n plus n time.
Now you might be wondering
why do you want to do that.
Well there's a lot of reasons, so
an obvious one which is relevant for
physical networks is to check if
a network has broken into two pieces.
So certainly if you're an Internet service
provider, you want to make sure that
from any point in your network, you can
reach any other point in the network.
And that boils down to just understanding
whether the graph that represents you
network, is a connected graph, that is if
it's in one piece, or not in one piece.
So obviously, you can ask this same
question about recreational examples.
So if you return to the movie graph,
maybe you're wondering,
can you get from every single actor
in the IMDB database to Kevin Bacon?
Or are there actors for
which you cannot reach Kevin Bacon?
Via a sequence of edges,
a sequences of movies in which two
actors have both played a role.
So that's something that boils down
to a connectivity computation.
If you have networked data and you want to
display it, you want to visualize it and
show it to a group of people so
that they can interpret it.
Obviously one thing you want to do is you
want to know if there's multiple pieces,
and then you want to display
the different pieces separately.
So let me make sure that one probably
a little less obvious application of
undirected connectivity is that it gives
us a nice quick and dirty heuristic for
doing clustering if you have
paralyzed information about objects.
Let me be a little more concrete.
Suppose you have a set of objects
that you really care about.
This could be documents, maybe web pages
that you crawl, something like that.
It could be a set of images, either
your own or drawn from some data base.
Or it could be, for
example, a set of genomes.
Suppose further, that you have a pairwise
function, which for each pair of objects
tells you whether they are very much
like each other or very much different.
So let's suppose that two objects
are very similar to each other,
like the two web pages
that are almost the same.
Or there are two genomes where you can get
from one to the other with a small number
of mutations.
Then, they have a low score.
So low numbers,
close to zero, indicates that the objects
are very similar to each other.
High numbers, let's say,
they can go up to a thousand or
something, indicate that they
are very different objects.
Two webpages that have nothing to
do with each other, two genomes for
totally unrelated parts, or
two images that seem to be of
completely different people or
even completely different objects.
Now here's a graph you can
construct using these objects and
the similarity data that
you have about them.
So you can have a graph where
the nodes are the objects.
Okay, so for each image, for
each document, whatever,
you have a single node and
then for a given pair of nodes,
you put in an edge if and
only if the two objects are very similar.
So for example, you could put in
an edge between two objects if and
only if the score is at most ten.
So remember, the more similar two objects
are, the closer there score is to zero.
So you're going to get an edge
between very similar documents,
very similar genomes, very similar images.
Now in this graph you've constructed,
you can find the connected components.
So each of these connected components
will be a group of objects, which more or
less are all very similar to each other.
So this would be a cluster of closely
related objects in your database.
And you can imagine a lot of reasons why,
given a large set of unstructured data,
just a bunch of pictures,
a bunch of documents or
whatever, you might want to find
clusters of highly related objects.
So we'll probably see more
sophisticated heuristics for
clustering in some SQL course.
But already undirected connectivity gives
you a super fast linear time quick and
dirty heuristic for
identifying clusters of similar objects,
given pairwise data about similarity.
So that's some reasons
you might want to do it.
Now let's actually talk
about how to compute
the components in the near
time using just a simple for
loop and breadth-first search
as it's inner work horse.
So here's the code to compute
all the connected components
of an undirected graph.
So first we initialize all
nodes as being unexplored.
I'm also going to assume
that the nodes have names.
Let's say that the names are from 1 to n.
So these names could just be the position
in the node array that these nodes occupy.
So this is going to be an outer for loop,
which walks through the nodes in
an arbitrary order, let's say from 1 to n.
This outer for loop is to ensure that
every single node of the graph will be
inspected for
sure at some point in the algorithm.
Now, again, one of maxims is that we
should never do redundant work, so
before we start exploring from some node,
we check if they've already been there.
And if we haven't seen i before,
then we invoke the breath-first search,
a term we were talking about previously
in the lecture, in the graph G,
starting from the node I.
So to make sure this is clear,
let's just run this algorithm
on this blue graph to the right.
So we start in the outer for
loop and we said i equal to 1.
And we say have we explored
node number 1 yet.
And of course not,
we haven't explored anything yet.
So the first thing we're going to
do is we're going to invoke
BFS on node number 1 here.
So now we start running the usual
breadth for search subroutine starting
from this node one and so we explore layer
one here is going to be nodes 3 and 5.
So we explore them in some order for
example maybe node number 3
is what we explore second.
Then node number five is
what we explore third and
then the second layer in this component
is going to be the nodes 7 and 9.
So we'll explore them in some order as
well and say 7 first followed by 9.
So after this BFS initiated
from node number one completes,
of course it will have found
everything it could possibly find,
namely the five nodes in the same
connected component as node number 1.
And of course, all of the five of these
nodes will be marked as explored.
So now we return once that exits we return
to the outer for loop we increment I we go
to I equal 2, and we say we already
explored node number 2 no we have not.
And so now we invoke BFS
again from node number 2.
So that will be the sixth node we explore.
There's not much to do from two,
all we can do is go to 4, so
that's the seventh node we explore.
That BFS terminates at finding
the nodes in this connected component,
then we go back to the outer for loop.
We increment i to 3, we say we've
already seen node number three.
Yes we have, we saw that in
the first breadth first search.
So we certainly don't bother to BFS from
node 3, then we increment item four.
Have we seen 4?
Yes we have, in the second called to BFS.
Have we seen node 5?
Yes we have, in the first call to BFS.
Have we seen node 6?
No, we have not.
So the final indication of breadth-first
search begins from node number 6.
That's going to be the eighth
node overall that we see.
And then we're going to see the notes
8 and 10 in some order, so for
example maybe we first
explore note number 8.
That's one of the first
layer in this component,
and then note number 10 is the other note
of the first layer in this component.
So in general, what's going on,
well what we know
will happen when we invoked that
first search from a given node i.
We're going to discover exactly
the nodes in i's connected component.
Right, anything where there's a path
from i to that node, we'll find it.
That's the BFS guarantee, that's also
the definition of a connected component.
All the other nodes
which have a path to i.
Another thing that I hope was
clear from the example, but
just to reiterate it,
is every search call,
when you explore a node, you remember
that through the entire for loop.
So when we invoke breadth-first search
from node number 1, we explore nodes 1, 3,
5, 7 and 9, and we keep those marked as
explored for the rest of this algorithm.
And that's so
we don't do redundant work when we
get to later stages of the for loop.
So as far as what does this
algorithm accomplish, well,
it certainly finds every
connected component.
There is absolutely no way it
can miss a node because this for
loop literally walks through the nodes,
all of them, one at a time.
So you're not going to miss a node.
Moreover, we know that as soon as
you hit a connected component for
the first time, and you do
breadth-first search from that node,
you're going to find the whole thing.
That the breadth-first a search guarantee.
As far as what's the running time, well
it's going to be exactly what we want.
It's going to be linear time, which again
means proportional to the number of edges
plus the number of vertices.
And again depending on the graph, one of
these might be bigger that the other.
So why is it O of m plus n?
Well as far as the nodes, we have to do
this initialization there where we mark
them all as unexplored, so
that takes constant time per node.
We have just the basic overhead of a for
loop, so that's constant time per node.
And then we have this check,
constant time per node, so that's O of n.
And then recall we proved that
within breath for research,
you do a amount of work proportional.
You do constant time for
each node in that connected component.
Now, each of the nodes of the graph is in
exactly one of the connected components.
So you'll do constant time for
each node in the BFS in which
you discover that node.
So that's again, o of n over all
of the connected components.
And as far as the edges, note we don't
even bother to look at edges until
we're inside one of these
breadth first search calls.
They played no role in the outer for
loop or in the pre-processing.
And remember what we proved about
an indication of breadth first search.
The running time,
you only do constant amount of work
per edge in the connected
component that you're exploring.
In the worst case, you look at
an edge once from either endpoint and
each of that triggers
a constant amount of work.
So when you discover a given
connected component,
the edge work is proportional to the
number of edges in that kind of component.
Each edge of the graph is only in exactly
one of the connect components, so
over this entire for loop,
over all of these BFS calls.
For each edge of the graph,
you'll only be responsible for
a constant amount of
work of the algorithm.
So summarizing because breadth-first
search from a given starting node.
That is, works in time proportional to the
size of that component, piggybacking on
that sub routine and looping over
all of the nodes of the graph.
We find all of the connecting components
in time proportional to the amount of
edges and nodes in the entire graph.